For the restructuring of Math 105, there are three major modules.

Module 1 (Logic and Probability)


Chapter 1: Logic (Content is to be taken from Math In Society) (Vera)
1. Take out sets and venn diagram
2. On chapter review, we need to take out questions related to sets and venn diagram.

Chapter 2: Probability (Content is to be taken from Math In Society) (Erich)
1. Take out venn diagram and all questions related to venn diagram.
Note 1: Must remove references to regular text chapter 2 or 3.
Note 2: Video includes Venn diagrams. Should we leave it?

Chapter 3: (Bernice)

Module 2 (Statistics)
Chapter 4: Statistics
1. Definition of statistics and its importance ((Content is to be taken from Math In Society- Introduction to Statistics and include statistical 
process)
2. Describing Data (Quantitative and Qualitative)(Content is to be taken from Math In Society- )
3. Dependent and Independent variabels.
4. Branches of statistics(Descriptive and Inferential Statistics
For 1-4, we can use the OER materials from Math 132.

Sub topics for Descriptive Statistics
1. Summary Statistics (Measures of center); mean, median and mode and how its interpretation.
2. Summary Statistics (Measures of variation); range, standard deviation and IQR.
3. Graphs
4. Interpreting Graphs.

Sub topics for Inferential Statistics
1. Sample and Population
2. Sampling Methods
3. Point Estimate and Confidence Interval and how to interpret confidence interval.


Fundamentals of Studies
1. Observational and Experimental Studies
2. Treatment Groups
3. Placebo
4. Randomization



Module 3 (Money Management) (Erich, Vera, and Bernice, after creation of txt files from Openstax)
1. Credit cards- take materials from the Contemporary Math from openstax. We will be using the formula for calculations.

2. Income tax- take materials from Math in Society, however, use current tax brackets.

3. Simple and Compound Interest- materials from Math in Society, however, take out 2.2.10.

4. Making Personal Budget- materials from Opentax, however, this will be in a form of activity to introduce the concept of savings.

5. Savings- materials from Math in Society, however take out 2.3.4. 
Include OpenTax notes (methods of savings, leave out Annuities as savings)
Use openstax examples as examples.

6. Investment- materials from Opentax.
Readings only. Leave out calculations.

7. Loans- materials from OpenTax
For calculations insert the link from previous math 105.

