Text File for Money Management Methods of Savings section.
url: https://openstax.org/books/contemporary-mathematics/pages/6-5-making-a-personal-budget

Learning Objectives
After completing this section, you should be able to:

1. Create a personal budget with the categories of expenses and income.
2. Apply general guidelines for a budget.

A budget is an outline of how money and resources should be spent. Companies have them, individuals have them, your college has one. But do you have one?

Creating a realistic budget is an important step in careful stewardship of your financial health. Designing your budget will help understand the financial priorities you have, and the constraints on your life choices. You want to have enough income to pay not only for the necessities, but also for things that represent your wants, like trips or dinner out. You also may want to save money for large purchases or retirement. You do not want to just get by, and you do not want the problems associated with overdue balances, rising debt, and possibly losing something you have worked hard to obtain.

While creating a budget may seem intimidating at first, coming up with your basic budget outline is the hardest part. Over time, you will adjust not only the numbers, but the categories.

Creating a Budget
You should view creating a budget as a financial tool that will help you achieve your long-term goals. A budget is an estimation of income and expenses over some period of time. You will be able to track your progress, which will help you to prepare for the future by making smart investment decisions.

There are several budget-creating tools available, such as the apps Good budget and Mint, and Google Sheets. Getting started, though, begins well before you find an app. The following are steps that can be used to create your monthly budget.

1. Track your income and expenses Review your income and expenses for the past 6 months to a year. This will give you an idea of your current habits.
2. Set your income baseline Determine all the sources of income you will have. This income may from paychecks, investments, or freelance work. It even includes child support and gifts. Be sure to use income after taxes. This allows you to determine your maximum expenditures per month.
NOTE: For income that is not steady, such as gig work or freelance work, use the previous 6 to 12 months of income to find an average income from that gig or freelance work. Use this average in the budgeting process.
3. Determine your expenses Review your bills from the past 6 months. You should include mortgage payments or rent, insurance, car payments, utilities, groceries, transportation expenses, personal care, entertainment, and savings. Using your credit card statements and bank statements will help you determine these amounts. Be aware that some of the expenses will not change over time. These are referred to as fixed expenses, like rent, car payments, insurance, internet service, and the like. Other expenses may vary widely from month to month and are appropriately called variable expenses, and include such expenses as gasoline, groceries.
NOTE: Some expenses are yearly, such as insurance or property taxes. Other expanses may be quarterly (four times per year) or semiannual (twice per year). To budget for such bills by month, divide the bill total by the number of months the bill covers.
4. Categorize your expenses These categories may be housing, transportation, or food, for broad categories, or may get more specific, where you categorize car payments, car insurance, and gasoline separately. The categories are your choices. Be sure to account for the cost of maintaining a vehicle or home. The more specific you are, the better you’ll understand your spending needs and habits.
5. Total your monthly income and monthly expenses and compare These values should be compared. If your expenses are higher than your income, then adjustments have to be made. Decisions of what to do with any extra income is part of the planning process also.
6. Make plans for unplanned expenses Ask anyone, an unexpected car repair can ruin a carefully crafted budget. Have a plan for how you can be ready for these random expenses. This often means creating a cushion in your budget.
7. Use your budget to make decisions and adjust for any changes Your budget is a changeable document. Add to it when you wish, refer to it when special purchases are to be made. Keeping your budget up to date helps accommodate changes in income and expenses.

VIDEO
Creating a Budeget (url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K5UlgTkadV0)

In this section, we will focus on income and expenses. One of the easiest ways to manage a budget is to create a table, with one column containing income sources, another with income values, a third with expense categories, and a last containing expenses. An example is shown in Table 6.1.

Income Source	Amount	Expense	Amount
Full-time job	$3,565	Rent	$975
Uber	$185	Car Payment	$355
TOTAL	$3,750	Student Loan	$418
Electric	$76
Food	$400
Gasoline	$250
Car Insurance	$165
Clothing	$100
Entertainment	$100
TOTAL	$2,839
***NOTE TO AUTHORS: Please see url at top of page for layout of Table 6.1.

WHO KNEW?
Gross Pay and Take Home Pay
If you’ve ever had a paycheck, you know that taxes are taken out of your pay before you get your check. This amount of money varies from state to state, and sometimes even city to city. For a person making $50,000 per year gross salary in Salt Lake City, Utah, take home pay is about 75.6% of gross salary. In Detroit, Michigan, take home pay is about 74.5% of gross salary. Lakeland, Florida, take home pay is about 80.5% of gross salary. These also change based on how much a person earns! Before choosing a place to live, it makes sense to determine how much deductions from pay will impact your income.

EXAMPLE 6.49
Creating a Budget
Heather has graduated college and currently works as a nurse for a rural medical group. Her net monthly income from that job is $3,765.40. She also works part-time on the weekends, earning another $672.00 per month. Her monthly expenses are rent at $1,050, car payments at $489, student loan payments at $728, car insurance at $139, utilities at $130, clothing at $150, entertainment (going out with friends, Netflix, Amazon Prime, movies) at $300, credit card debt at $200, food at $360, and gasoline at $275. Create her budget in a table, compare the total income to total expenses, and determine how much excess income per month she has or how much she falls short by each month.
Solution
Step 1: To begin, we create the table with appropriate headings.

Income Source	Amount	Expense	Amount
Step 2: Her income categories are her nursing job, with $3,765.40 per month, and her part-time job, with $672.00 per month. Entering these into the table, we have the following.

Income Source	Amount	Expense	Amount
Nursing	$3,765.40		
Part-time	$672.00		
Step 3: Her monthly expenses are listed above. Entering the categories and the amount for each of those expenses, the table is now

Income Source	Amount	Expense	Amount
Nursing	$3,765.40	Rent	$1,050
Part-time	$672.00	Car Payment	$489
Student Loan	$728
Car Insurance	$139
Utilities	$130
Clothing	$150
Entertainment	$300
Credit Card	$200
Food	$400
Gasoline	$250
Step 4: Totaling the income and expenses, we see that her total income is $4,437.40 per month, and her total expenses are $3,836 per month. Comparing these, we see that Heather has $601.40 in excess income per month. This provides a cushion in her budget.
***NOTE TO AUTHORS: Please see url at top of page for layout of Solution to Example 6.49.

YOUR TURN 6.49
1.	
Mateo works as a union electrician in a suburban area. Monthly, his take home pay is $3,375. He sometimes does small side jobs for family or friends, and averages about $300 per month from these little jobs. His monthly expenses are his mortgage at $986.78, truck payments at $589.00, truck insurance at $312, utilities at $167, clothing at $150, entertainment at $400, credit card debt at $325, food at $470, and gasoline at $375. Create Mateo’s budget in a table, compare the total income to total expenses, and determine how much excess income per month he has or how much he falls short by each month.
